To describe "Pain & Gain" as a Michael Bay movie on steroids would be accurate but also redundant and a little misleading. Pumped-up, aggressive, muscle-headed entertainment is Mr. Bay?s specialty, after all, and while this grisly true-crime drama is partly about performance-enhancing drugs and the bulky men who love them, it is also, compared with ?Armageddon? or the ?Transformers? series, a stripped-down, modest enterprise in which no major American city is reduced to rubble.

This is not to suggest that the film, written by Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely and based on a series of articles by Pete Collins (published in Miami New Times), is in any way subtle or restrained. The opening scene, a police chase from which the rest of the story flashes back, sets a tone of hectic excess. Mark Wahlberg, running from the heavily armed forces of law and order, dashes across rooftops and lumbers, sometimes in slow motion, through streets and alleys. The camera swirls around him, freezing as a glob of saliva pops out of his mouth, dropping down to allow us a peek up his nostrils and then tilting and sliding to register the impact of his face on the windshield of a car.

What follows is two hours of sweat, blood and cheerful, nasty vulgarity, punctuated by voice-over ruminations about Jesus, physical fitness and the American dream, along with a few tactical visits to a strip club. It all leaves you pondering whether you have just seen a monumentally stupid movie or a brilliant movie about the nature and consequences of stupidity.

Why choose? ?Pain & Gain,? though it compresses some events and characters, hews fairly close to the facts as related in Mr. Collins?s deadpan chronicle of idiotic criminality and sloppy police work. Mr. Wahlberg plays Daniel Lugo, a personal trainer and bodybuilding enthusiast who lands a job at a Miami gym after serving time for an investment scam. Swearing that he has learned his lesson ? that there is no substitute for hard work ? he sets his sights on a South Florida vision of the good life, egged on by a self-help guru (Ken Jeong) who fills his head with slogans and three-point plans for success. ?If I deserve it,? Daniel says, ?then the universe will serve it.?

What he feels the universe owes him is more or less what a teenage boy raised on ?Entourage,? Grand Theft Auto and the oeuvre of Michael Bay might demand, though, since ?Pain & Gain? is set in 1995, not all of those inspirations are available to Daniel. But the world, then as now, is full of hot babes, fast cars and money, tokens of a high-rolling, hedonistic existence just beyond poor Daniel?s reach. He is motivated less by ambition than by a self-pitying sense of entitlement that is both democratic and Nietzschean. He says that he wants to be just like everybody else but also that he wants to set himself apart from the losers and suckers in whose ranks he unfairly languishes.

One day at the gym, Daniel spots a ticket out of palookaville in the person of Victor Kershaw (Tony Shalhoub), a pigeon-chested blowhard who hires Daniel to help him get into shape and brags endlessly about his offshore bank accounts, his boat, his mansion and the sandwich franchise near the airport that for some reason is his pride and joy. Victor is enough of a jerk that it is hard to feel too bad when Daniel enlists two fellow gym rats ? Adrian (Anthony Mackie) and Paul (Dwayne Johnson) ? to kidnap him. Rather than demand ransom, they decide to torture him into signing his assets over to them.

Adrian and Paul have dreams of their own. Adrian?s are to overcome his steroid-related sexual problems and to win the love of Robin (Rebel Wilson), a nurse who specializes in such ailments. Paul, an ex-convict who has found religion, is a bit less clear about what he wants, and he clings to a sense of his own righteousness, even after some dramatic backsliding. Some of this occurs in the company of Sorina (Bar Paly), a Romanian-born stripper who had previously dated Daniel and who believes that he and his partners are government agents on a dangerous, top-secret mission.

Sorina is blond and not very bright, which might count as an offensive stereotype if the guys she hung around with had any brains to speak of. Daniel likens himself to Tony Montana in ?Scarface? or Michael Corleone in the Godfather pictures, but he and his accomplices ? including his boss, played by Rob Corddry ? would be more at home in ?Dumb and Dumber.? Not that the local representatives of law and order are especially clever. The gang blunders from one disaster to another, with results that are sometimes horrifying, sometimes hilarious and sometimes both. More absurd, and more shocking, is how much they get away with. You start to believe that Daniel may be right, that the universe is organized to reward amoral, shallow cretins like him.

The presence of Ed Harris as Ed Dubois, a private detective who seems to be the only decent, reasonably intelligent person in all of South Florida, does not do much to challenge this idea. Mr. Harris is, as always, an admirable actor, but the other guys ? the slobbery, hammy Mr. Shalhoub; the manic, weirdly sweet Mr. Mackie; the histrionically nervous Mr. Johnson; and the buff, dense, irritable Mr. Wahlberg - are much more fun.

Mr. Bay, while not exactly glorifying the crimes of the Sun Gym gang, does not entirely condemn them, either. A different kind of director might have made ?Pain & Gain? into a gamy, gritty sunshine noir, or else a knowing satire of idiot America. The easy move would be to invite the audience to look down on Daniel, Paul and Adrian, but Mr. Bay?s brand of populism holds them rigorously and maddeningly at eye level. The movie and, by implication, those of us watching it are no better than these guys. I found that unspeakably insulting and also impressive.
